Add debugger introduction to step-by-step (#8733)
godotengine/godot-docs: getting_started/step_by_step/debugger.rst

.. Intention:
    Introduce breakpoints in the debugger. It will help beginners to trace their codes.
    
.. Todo:
    All the contents about C# are not included. The author is not familiar with C#.

.. _doc_trace_code_with_debugger_:

Using the debugger
==================

In this lesson we will look at the breakpoints in Godot's built-in debugger.
We will write a bottom line checker to check if the position of the ``Sprite2D`` node 
is below the specific bottom line. The bottom line checker will send the ``Sprite2D`` 
node back to the desired position if it's found below the bottom line.
We will also set breakpoints to see if the checker is being called after the 
``Sprite2D`` node crosses the bottom line.

.. note:: A more detailed introduction to the debugger can be found in page 
          :ref:`doc_debugger_panel`

Setup scene
-----------

In :ref:`doc_scripting_player_input`, you should be able to control the ``Sprite2D``

> node via keyboard arrows. Now, we need to make sure that Sprite2D node will not cross 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
node via arrow keys. Now, we need to make sure that the ``Sprite2D`` node will not cross 
```

> the bottom line. Once the bottom line is crossed, we must to send it back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the bottom line. Once the bottom line is crossed, we must send it back.
```

First we need to define a custom signal. Once the bottom line checker finds that
the ``Sprite2D`` node has crossed the bottom line, it will emit the signal. 

> .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. tabs::
 .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript
```

            direction = -1
        if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_right"):
            direction = 1

        rotation += angular_speed * direction * delta

        var velocity = Vector2.ZERO
        if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_up"):
            velocity = Vector2.UP.rotated(rotation) * speed
	        
        position += velocity * delta
        check_bottom_line_crossed()

Now we need to connect the signal to the method. The method will be called 
after the signal is emitted. To do so, double-click on the ``icon_escaped``
signal in Node tab.

.. image:: img/debugger_01_connect_signals.webp

Click the ``Connect`` button. The method will be added automatically.

.. image:: img/debugger_02_apply_methods.webp

Now you should be able to see that the ``_on_node_crossed`` method has appeared.
Once the method is called, we will send the ``Sprite2D`` node back to position 
``(10, 10)``.

.. tabs::
 .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript

    func _on_node_crossed():
        position = Vector2(10,10)

Hit :kbd:`F6` (:kbd:`Cmd + R` on macOS) to run it. Use the arrow keys to control 
the ``Sprite2D`` node moving down. It should be teleported back to ``(10, 10)`` 
once it descends low enough.

> Setup breakpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Setup breakpoints
```

-----------------

> Now, let's examine the breakpoints and use them to trace our code. When the breakpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Now let's examine the breakpoints and use them to trace our code. When the breakpoint
```

is hit, the game will be paused. At the same time we can check the values in variables
to make sure that the game is running correctly.

Add a breakpoint at the ``position = Vector2(10, 10)`` line, to see if it's called 

> or not. To do so, click the left side of line number to add the breakpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or not. To do so, click the left side of the line number to add the breakpoint.
```

.. image:: img/debugger_03_add_break_points.webp

> Hit the :kbd:`F6` (:kbd:`Cmd + R` on macOS) and move the ``Sprite2D`` node down. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hit :kbd:`F6` (:kbd:`Cmd + R` on macOS) and move the ``Sprite2D`` node down. 
```

After the ``Sprite2D`` node crosses the bottom line, the game will be paused and 
you will be switched back to the debugger.

.. image:: img/debugger_04_back_to_godot.webp

The debugger panel will appear at the bottom panel. Clicking the button in the yellow
box will continue running the game, until the breakpoints are triggered again. 
Clicking the button in the red box will run the game for another line of code and 

> then pause again. When game is paused, you can check the values of local variables,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then pause again. When the game is paused, you can check the values of local variables,
```

as shown in the green box in the image.

Summary
-------

> In this lesson, we use the signal to check if the ``Sprite2D`` node crossed the bottom line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this lesson, we use the signal to check if the ``Sprite2D`` node crossed the bottom line.
```

> We also use break points and debugger to trace the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also use breakpoints and the debugger to trace the code.
```

.. Intention:

>     Introduce break points in debugger. It will help beginners to trace their codes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Introduce breakpoints in debugger. It will help beginners to trace their codes.
```

    
.. Todo:
    All the contents about C# is not included. Author is not familiar with C#.

.. _doc_trace_code_with_debugger_:

> Using debugger
> ==============

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the debugger
==================
```

> In this lesson, we will look at the break points in Godot built-in debugger.
> We will write a bottom line checker to check if the position of Sprite2D node is 
> below bottom line. Bottom line checker will send Sprite2D node back to desired 
> position if it's under the bottom line.
> Also, we will set break points to see if the checker is being called after the 
> Sprite2D node crossed the bottom line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this lesson we will look at the breakpoints in Godot's built-in debugger.
We will write a bottom line checker to check if the position of the ``Sprite2D`` node is
below the bottom line. The bottom line checker will send the ``Sprite2D`` node back
to the desired position if it's below the bottom line.
We will also set breakpoints to see if the checker is being called after the
``Sprite2D`` node crosses the bottom line.
```

> .. note:: More detailed introduction to debugger can be found in page 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: A more detailed introduction to the debugger can be found in
```

          :ref:`doc_debugger_panel`

Setup scene
-----------

> In :ref:`doc_scripting_player_input`, you should be able to control Sprite2D node 
> via keyboard arrows. Now, we need to make sure that Sprite2D node will not cross 
> the bottom line. Once the bottom line is crossed, we need to sent it back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In :ref:`doc_scripting_player_input` you should be able to control the ``Sprite2D`` node
via the arrow keys. Now we need to make sure that the ``Sprite2D`` node will not cross
the bottom line. Once the bottom line is crossed, we need to send it back.
```

> First, we need to define a custom signal. Once the bottom line checker found that
> Sprite2D node crossed the bottom line, it will emit the signal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First we need to define a custom signal. Once the bottom line checker has found that
the ``Sprite2D`` node has crossed the bottom line, it will emit the signal.
```
Or
```suggestion
First we need to define a custom signal. Once the bottom line checker finds that
the ``Sprite2D`` node has crossed the bottom line, it will emit the signal.
```

.. tabs::

>     .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript
> 
>         extends Node2D
> 
>         signal node_crossed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript

    extends Node2D

    signal node_crossed
```

> Then, check if Sprite2D node crossed the bottom line every frame. Once Sprite2D 
> node crossed the bottom line, ``icon_escaped`` signal will be emitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then check if the ``Sprite2D`` node has crossed the bottom line every frame.
Once the ``Sprite2D`` node crosses the bottom line, the ``icon_escaped`` signal
will be emitted.
```

> .. tabs::
>     .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript
> 
>         func check_bottom_line_crossed():
>             if position.y > 600:
>                 icon_escaped.emit()
> 
> 
>         func _process(delta): 
>             # Arrow control logics
>             var direction = 0
>             if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_left"):
>                 direction = -1
>             if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_right"):
>                 direction = 1
> 
>             rotation += angular_speed * direction * delta
> 
>             var velocity = Vector2.ZERO
>             if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_up"):
>                 velocity = Vector2.UP.rotated(rotation) * speed
> 	        
>             position += velocity * delta
>             check_bottom_line_crossed()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. tabs::
 .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript

    func check_bottom_line_crossed():
        if position.y > 600:
            icon_escaped.emit()

    func _process(delta): 
        # Arrow control logic.
        var direction = 0
        if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_left"):
            direction = -1
        if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_right"):
            direction = 1

        rotation += angular_speed * direction * delta

        var velocity = Vector2.ZERO
        if Input.is_action_pressed("ui_up"):
            velocity = Vector2.UP.rotated(rotation) * speed
	        
        position += velocity * delta
        check_bottom_line_crossed()
```

> Now, we need to connect the signal to the method. The method code will be called 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we need to connect the signal to the method. The method will be called
```

after the signal is emitted. To do so, double click the ``icon_escaped``
signal in Node tab.

.. image:: img/debugger_01_connect_signals.png

> Then, click connect button. Method will be added automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then click the connect button. The method will be added automatically.
```

.. image:: img/debugger_02_apply_methods.png

> Now, you should be able to see ``_on_node_crossed`` method appeared. Once
> the method is called, we will sent the Sprite2D node back to position (10,10).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you should be able to see that the ``_on_node_crossed`` method has appeared. Once
the method is called, we will send the ``Sprite2D`` node back to position ``(10, 10)``.
```

> .. tabs::
>     .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript
> 
>         func _on_node_crossed():
>             position = Vector2(10,10)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. tabs::
 .. code-tab:: gdscript GDScript

    func _on_node_crossed():
        position = Vector2(10,10)
```

> Hit :kbd:`F6` (:kbd:`Cmd + R` on macOS) to run it. Use arrow keys to control Sprite2D
> node moving down. It should be teleported back to ``(10,10)`` once it's low enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hit :kbd:`F6` (:kbd:`Cmd + R` on macOS) to run it. Use the arrow keys to control the ``Sprite2D``
node moving down. It should be teleported back to ``(10, 10)`` once it's low enough.
```

> Setup break points
> ------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Setup breakpoints
-----------------

```

> Now, we are going to take a look at the break points and use them to trace out code.
> Once the break point is hit, the game will be paused. At the same time, we can check
> the values in variables to make sure that game is running correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we are going to take a look at the breakpoints, and use them to trace out code.
Once the breakpoint is hit the game will be paused. At the same time we can check
the values in variables to make sure that the game is running correctly.
```

> Add the break point at the ``position = Vector2(10,10)``, to see if it's 
> called or not. To do so, click the left side of line number to add the break point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a breakpoint at the ``position = Vector2(10, 10)`` line, to see if it's
called or not. To do so, click the left side of line number to add the breakpoint.
```

.. image:: img/debugger_03_add_break_points.png

> Hit the :kbd:`F6` (:kbd:`Cmd + R` on macOS) and move Sprite2D node down. After Sprite2D
> node crossed the bottom line, the game will be paused and switch back to Godot debugger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hit :kbd:`F6` (:kbd:`Cmd + R` on macOS) and move the ``Sprite2D`` node down. After the ``Sprite2D``
node crosses the bottom line the game will be paused and switch back to the debugger.
```

.. image:: img/debugger_04_back_to_godot.png

> Debugger panel will show at the bottom panel. Click the button in the yellow box will 
> continue the game, until the break points were triggered again. Click the button in the 
> red box, the game will run for another line of code and paused again.
> When game is paused, you can check the value of local variables, as shown in the green 
> box of the image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The debugger panel will show at the bottom panel. Clicking the button in the yellow box will
continue running the game, until the breakpoints are triggered again. Clicking the button in the
red box will run the game for another line of code and then pause again.
When game is paused you can check the values of local variables, as shown in the green
box in the image.
```

Summary
-------

> In this lesson, we use the signal to check if the Sprite2D node crossed the bottom line.
> We also use break points and debugger to trace the code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this lesson we use a signal to check if the ``Sprite2D`` node crossed the bottom line.
We also use breakpoints and the debugger to trace the code.
```

In the next section, :ref:`doc_your_first_2d_game`, you'll create a complete 2D
game and put everything you learned so far into practice.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
